## **Work Log**

I chose to store all kernel and organizational related work here. Each markdown file contains personal diagrams/math over that specific layer kernel. This work log serves also as a timeline of cuGPT.

Implemented Language Model head and Sampler. LM Head uses weight tying, reutilizing the embedding weight matrix transposed to obtain logits from the final layernorm. Sampler choice is Online Softmax top-k fused (top k=50 by default), implemented from [this paper, algorithm 4](https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.02867) with some additional changes for removing redundant expf functions and excessive top-k checks calls. The resulting sampler takes in input logits[B, C] and outputs the next tokens[B] for each batch.

The following up task is setting up FlashAttn for the suitable tensor sizes, Q,K,V tensor preparation and causal mask application. Tests for fused layers will follow afterwards. Backward kernels are right now out of scope for complexity and accessibility reasons.

Extensive effort in Flash Attention forward kernel, utilizing Tensor Cores at FP16 for mixed precision. It is currently under development. The current focus is on proper inlined device helper functions to aid readable and clear data flow. For a single GPU to run inference locally, it needs to compute every 12 heads in a single run. This is achieved by using CUDA Grids and proper tensor striding to select batches and heads for parallel execution. A clear distinction in notation is to be made: d refers to d_head not d_model which is 768 in GPT-2. Particularly C = 768 and dividing the work between 12 heads gives us d_head = 768/12 = 64. Thus d = 64.

The direction in which the Flash Attention kernel development heading was misaligned with the cuGPT goals and is thus migrated to /dev. There will not be tensor operations for the time being in the kernels as element wise functions such as softmax require in-register access mapping to the wmma::fragment struct which varies significantly by GPU model, reducing accessibility. In its place will be a standard Flash Attention implementation utilizing standard matmul logic with mixed precision, proper tensor striding and inlined device helper functions.

Unit testings are being made for LM Head and Softmax TOP-K sampling with temperature setting in the generation phase. The prefill phase softmax (T > 1) is yet to come, possibly is the next line of attention. For large tensor sizes, GPU will be utilized instead of the CPU.

Correction: all forward pass related functions will be executed in the GPU. The CPU is responsible only for data flow and main inference loop orchestration. Logits sampler and final softmax layer will be transformed to kernel code and the CPU functions derived before will function as unit tests for those kernels. Following is model initializations and weight loadings testing, before incrementally building the forward pass.

FlashAttn is done. Each output block chunk is furthermore tiled by warps using warp-level primitives. Indexology is renewed to prevent register spilling by accomodating loop unrolling and proper template usage in for loops. Kept independent warps workload independent, avoiding block-level synchronization as much as possible to maximize throughput. I am looking back into the main inference loop and incorporating the newly developed kernels to the inference stack. Fortunately, prefill and decode phase can use the same flash mha kernel with only minor changes to epilouge cache appending kernel. A good concern to be voiced and solved later is the static buffer allocation made during model initialization. No solution is given since it is currently out-of-scope. I have decided to keep smaller kernels like attention weight projections out of the 'implemented kernels' checklist since they are not as much of a milestone as the other ones are.

Updated MHA FLASHATTN to do casual masking. The implementation simple and efficient, using boundry checks to skip calculations and instead writing 0.0f to the unnormalized P outputs for the PV matmul, reducing the total amount of matmul operations and memory fetches by halve per head. That is, (batch_count * head_count * N * N) / 2 less matmul in total. The unit tests were a success and now can be implemented to the main inference loop. I also have implemented KV cache using pointer slicing on the device memory. The following kernels to wrap up prefill_forward is softmax and sampler. I have unfortunately written both in CPU code initially but then opted to transform them to GPU kernels to minimize overhead caused by memory copies between host and device. The idea is that you pass your model struct into the forward_prefill and forward_decode alongside your streams to run a configured model that you have initialized. This way the forward functions remain modular to any model that shares the same architecture. Sub-layer modifications can be made by extra path-control if conditions on the forward functions to modify which sub-architecture that that initialized model prefers to follow. I omit the use of header files intentionally in the main loop to display what it takes to run inference in a single document and show that it can be done without a barrier. The pointers are written with clear annotation to aid readers in following and also help them notice the structure of the transformer and observe how activations can be overwritten multiple times, reducing overall memory needed (though not the most optimized memory management is at work). Also I would like to point out the importance of how kernels inputs and outputs can differ. Layernorm for example is better to have an input and output seperate of each other so that the input can be used later as an residual addition while a softmax kernel is preffered to overwrite the input activation since we will not be needing the pre-softmax tensor. These are also annotated in the main inference loop by showing the activations used in the forward function alongside which ones are overwritten, indicated by (OVERWRITTEN), and the output(s) of that specific kernel.